---
title: I Am a Self Taught Programmer
layout: default
comments: true
---

# I Am a Self Taught Programmer

This a subject that I don't really think much about anymore, but I have encountered more and more people who think I am a rare occurrence. So I feel I should write about this to leave a bread crumb for others.

I am a self-taught programmer and have gotten to a position in my life where I do not feel my lack of degree is holding back any job opportunity I desire, or constraining me to less pay. In fact quite the contrary, I make more money than the average computer science PhD graduate, and my current job I took after I shopped around and had gotten job offers from nearly a dozen different companies.

I encounter people who are surprised this, people say I am rare occurrence. I would like this to not be the case, if I am a rare occurrence I would like to be the prototype that becomes the norm.

Why? One of my primary motivations for working in technology, and one of my primary hopes for the internet, is that it would become a global education platform. I believe there is no single thing that could improve humanities condition more so than a freely available, and truly viable, education platform, for free, anywhere in the world. This is actually the primary motivation which made me to decide to not get a degree. Because if I were to work in tech, on the premise building up tech will become a truly viable global education platform, how can I believe that to be true if I myself could not educate myself with that platform and make it. Thus not having a degree, and making it in this world, by being entirely self-taught from the internet, became an almost existential imperative for me. My ability to thrive became self-evidential that what I was doing was good for the world, because it proved that personal conviction, and the internet, is all one needs to thrive in this world. I love that.

Some people when starting college imagine themselves as being successful lawyers, or doctors, or white coat scientists, solving the greatest problems of the world. They want to tell people of their pedigree and credential, which I do respect greatly. However, I myself saw the greatest problem in the world as being, there was not a truly viable route for people to rise to empowerment and self-education. Rather than be a symbol of the pedigree and credential of a tradition and institution, I wanted to be the symbol to a new solution to a foundational global problem. I wanted to represent that the internet is all you really need to thrive, really, truly that's it. I believe that the more humanity believes they can just go to the internet, and self-educate, create, do, the better the world will become. It's for this reason I love to tell people I am self-taught, I wear it with incredible pride, because I believe it represents the way forward. More people need to be the product of the internet and self-directed learning.

However I do say all fo this while still fully recognizing and fully respecting academic credential. I have the utmost respect for any real PhD in computer science, as I recognize that as an extremely difficult path, and great accomplishment. But for anyone who does not feel the conviction to go that route, I would encourage you not to. Because being a symbol that you can do it purely by being self-taught I think is such a powerful and necessary symbol needed for where the world needs to go.

I suppose I should share some pointers of how you can make it by being self-taught. Really, the primary thing is, become obsessed, turn it into your life. Find forums and meet up groups around your chosen focus, turn that into your primary social group. Read as many books as you can on your focus. Choose friends to hang out with that you can discuss your interests with. It's necessary to fully engross yourself in your focus as a culture.

Publish content, this is so important. If you want to make games, you need to get games published on app stores. If you want to make websites, you need to have a functional website you have created. The content you make does not need to be massive in scope, it just needs to be polished, and demonstrate potential.

You must have an adequate web presence. An up to date linked in. A website which is well formatted and displays your skills well. Start writing a blog to show you spend a lot of time thinking about particular subjects. Create a youtube channel to document snippets of your work as you create things. You need to have a github repo with multiple open source projects, and the code in them needs to be good. Half of the purpose for a web presence is serve as your resume and portfolio, the other half is to be a funnel for recruiters. If you construct your web presence properly you will never have to apply to a company, recruiters will find you.

Interview, a lot. Any chance you get to interview, take it, and do the interview, even if you have no desire to take the job. This is to practice interviewing. There was a period of years where I would do an interview probably every other week, many of them just phone interviews, but still those are incredibly valuable to hone your skill at interviewing. Your technical knowledge must be thorough, and good, your responses to technical questions must be practiced and eloquent. You have to learn to talk, think and present yourself in a particular way during the interview. Your personal story must be refined, you must have a story about your development as a person, your interests professionally and personally, how you all fit together and how you fit into the role you are applying for. Becoming somewhat good at acting doesn't hurt in this department either. The only way to get good at this is to do it, so try to get as many interviews as you can just to practice interviewing.

Lastly, the best part about tech work, is it's probably the easiest profession to create your own independent income streams in. So don't focus entirely on getting hired somewhere, always allocate a certain percentage of your energy to growing your own business efforts.

I really do believe that anyone who wants to could radically improve their life purely thought the internet and self-direction. I personally want to die in a world where that is the only requirement to thrive in this world. So if you have any slight opening to walk that path yourself, you should, not just for you, but for all future generations.
